Alright. Let's get started with today's lecture. So,
actually, before we get started, one quick note
about office hours. It seemed from the poll
that some people were under the impression that
the office hours that follows each lecture is
just about that day's lectures topics, and this
is not the case. Like, can come to
office hours and ask us questions about any
lecture, whether it's the previous day or from
the previous week or even things not exactly
covered in this class that you're just curious
about. So, yeah, come to office hours with
questions about anything. One more time where is
it? Office hours are in the 30 2
G 9 Lounge, so Building 32 also known
as the Status Center has two towers, the
G Tower and the D Tower, so we're
in the Gates Tower on the Ninth Floor
so if you take the elevator all the
way up there's the lounge right in front
of you okay cool so today we're going
to be talking about version control systems so
I just want to get a sense of
whether you guys have used version control systems
before. So could you raise your hand if
you have any experience with git or any
other version control system like Subversion or Mercurial
or anything else? Oh, great. So that's a
good number of you. So I won't talk
about version control systems in general way too
much then. We'll pretty quickly get into the
details of git and, like, its data model
and its internals. But just as a quick
summary, version control systems are tools that are
used to keep track of changes to source
code or other collections of files or folders.
And as the name implies, these tools help
track the history of changes to some set
of documents. And, in addition to doing that,
they facilitate collaboration. So, they're really useful for
working with a group of people on a
software project. Version control systems track changes to
a folder and its contents in a series
of snapshots. So, you capture the entire state
of a folder and everything inside, like a
software project, and you have multiple of these
in a series of snapshots. Each snapshot encapsulates
the entire set of files and folders contained
within some top level directory. And then, version
control systems also maintain a bunch of metadata
along with the actual changes to the content,
and this is to make it possible to
figure things out like who authored a particular
change to a particular file or when was
a particular change made. And so, version control
systems maintain metadata like authors and commit timestamps,
and you can also attach extra messages to
these snapshots and things like that. And so,
why is version control useful? Well, it's useful
even when you're working on projects by yourself.
So, you can use it to look at
old versions of code you've written, figure out
like why something was changed by looking at
commit messages, work on different things in parallel
without conflicts by using different branches of development,
or be able to work on bug fixes
while keeping work on different features independent, things
like that. And so, it's an invaluable tool
even if you're working just by yourself even
on a small scale project. Like, think, instructions
of this course use git even on things
like homework assignments or class projects, even small
scale things in addition to our research or
larger software projects. And then, of course, version
control is a really powerful tool for working
with other people. So, it's useful for sending
patches of code around, resolving conflicts when different
people are working on the same piece of
code at the same time, things like that.
And so, it's a really powerful tool for
working by yourself or with others. And it
also has neat functionality to let you answer
questions that would otherwise be kind of hard
to answer, like who wrote a particular module
in a software project, or who edited a
particular line in a particular software project, why
was this particular line changed, when was it
changed, by whom, things like that. And, version
control systems also have some really powerful functionality
that we might cover at the end of
today's lecture, or you can find in the
lecture notes if we don't have time, to
do things like suppose you have some project
you've been working on for a couple years
and then you notice that some funny thing
about the project is broken, like you have
some unit test that doesn't pass anymore, and
it wasn't broken just now, it was broken
some time ago and you don't know exactly
when this, regression was introduced. Well, version control
systems have a way of automatically identifying this.
Like you can take git and give it
a unit test that's currently failing but you
know is passing at some point in the
past and it can binary search your history
and figure out exactly what changed your code
made it break. So lots of really powerful
fancy features if you know how to use
these tools properly. There are a number of
version control systems out there and git has
become kind of the de facto standard for
version control. So that's what we're going to
be covering in today's lecture. One comic I
want to show you, which was on the
screen beforehand. Let me bring it back up.
So, this is an XKCD comic that, illustrates
Git's reputation. Let me read it out loud
for you. This is Git. It tries collaborative
work on projects through a beautiful distributed graph
theory tree model. Cool. How do we use
it? No idea. Just memorize these shell commands
and type them to sync up. If you
get errors, save your work elsewhere, delete the
project and download a fresh copy. So, maybe
some people may not want to raise their
hands for this, but raise your hand if
you've ever done this before. I certainly have
when I was learning this tool. So good
number of you, here have done this before.
So the goal of this lecture is to
make it so you don't have to do
this anymore. Unfortunately, as this comic, illustrates, git's
interface is a pretty terribly designed interface. It's
a leaky abstraction, and so for this reason
we believe that learning git top down starting
with the interface is maybe not the best
way to go, and it can lead to
some confusion. It's possible, like this comic shows,
to memorize a handful of commands and think
of them as magic incantations and when everything
is working alright it kind of works out
alright. But then you have to follow the
approach of this comic whenever things go wrong.
So, while git has an ugly interface, its
underlying design and ideas are actually pretty beautiful.
An ugly interface has to be memorized, but
the beautiful ideas underlying git can actually be
understood. Once you understand gits internals, its data
model, which is actually not that complicated, then
you can learn the interface to get you
you'll have to memorize some things, but you
can understand what exactly certain commands do by
understanding how they manipulate the underlying data model.
And so, way we're going to teach git
today is first talk about the data model,
almost in abstract talk about how we might
model files and folders snapshots of history and
how they relate to each other, and then
after that we'll walk you through some git
commands and then finally in the resources and
exercises we'll link you to tutorials that'll teach
you all the specifics because there are lots
of different commands that you will need to
learn eventually. Any questions so far about our
teaching approach for today? Cool. Great. So, let's
get started. There are probably many ad hoc
approaches you could take to version control and
I'm guessing some of you may have done
this before. Like say you have some file
or folder where you have a bunch of
different files corresponding to some software project and
you want to track changes. You could just
say every day make a copy of that
entire folder and give that folder a timestamp.
When you want to do things like collaborate
with other people you could take the entire
folder turn it into a zip archive and
email it to somebody. And then whenever you
and your buddy are working on two different
features of a software project you can work
on them in parallel, then one of you
emails the zip file to the other person
and then you manually copy and paste the
appropriate segments from their code into your code
so that eventually you end up with one
piece of code that has both of your
features in it. This kind of sort of
works. Raise your hand if you've done this
before. I certainly have. Still a decent number
of you. Git lets us not do this
sort of thing. It has a well thought
out model that kind of facilitates these sorts
of interactions. Things that you might want to
do, like tracking your own history on your
own project or collaboration or things like that.
So git has a well thought out model
that enables things like branches and collaboration and
merging changes from other people. All sorts of
neat stuff. Git models history is a collection
of files and folders within some top level
directory. So you're probably familiar with this abstraction
just from files and folders on your own
computer and so here's one example like you
might have some top level directory. I'll just
call this like root in parentheses and this
directory might have say a folder in it
called foo and this folder inside of it
might have a file called bar dot txt
and this might have some content in it
like say this says hello world. And then
maybe this top level directory, it has one
folder in it. It could also have another
file in it. So say there's some other
file and this file also has some contents
in it. Alright. Simple enough. The terminology git
uses for these different things, for files and
folders, is this and the top level thing
are called trees. So this is a folder,
and then these things, what we normally call
files, are called blobs. Alright. Okay. So now
we have a model of files and folders,
and this is a recursive data structure. Trees
can contain other trees, and then trees can
contain both trees and files. Obviously files can't
contain trees. Alright. So now we have a
model of files and folders, and the kind
of top level of this thing, the thing
I've just labeled root, is the directory being
tracked. Like you might have some folder on
your computer corresponding to a software project. Now,
how do you model history once you have
a model of files and folders? Well, you
can imagine one way of doing it which
is you take a snapshot of this entire
thing and then history is just a linear
sequence of snapshots. Like, you might imagine that
it's You can almost think of it like
you have copies of the folder which are
dated and time stamped. Well, git doesn't use
a simple linear model like that. It uses
something a little bit fancier. You might have
heard this terminology before, but git uses a
directed acyclic graph to model history. And this
might sound like a bunch of fancy math
words, but it's actually not all that complicated.
So in git each snapshot has some number
of parents and basically want to know like
what change preceded what other change. So suppose
here I'm going to use circles to refer
to individual snapshots. This is the entire contents,
within this tree. So all the files and
folders in my project. My entire project may
be in some state and then I edit
some files and now it's in some other
state and then I add some more files
and that's in some other state and every
state points back to which state preceded it.
This so far is a linear history but
git lets us do something a little bit
fancier than this. You can also from a
certain snapshot fork your history and say I
want to base changes off of this version
and create a new snapshot like this. So
this way of modeling history allows you to
do things like, okay, I'm working on my
project. This is my main line of development.
I go up to here, and now I
have two different tasks I want to work
on. Suppose on one hand I have some
fancy new feature I want to add to
my project, and so I'm gonna be working
on that for a couple days. But separately
from that somebody's reported a bug to me
and I need to go chase down that
bug and fix it. Well, instead of working
on all that stuff kind of concurrently at
the same time in the same line of
development, git has its way of branching the
history into two separate forks and working on
different things in parallel temporarily in a way
that are unrelated to each other. So I
could take this base snapshot, like my project
is in some state where it works, and
then from here I could implement a new
feature that creates a new snapshot. So this
has the base project plus a new feature.
So I'll do like plus feature. And then
similarly, like separately from this I could go
back to this original snapshot because I don't
want to do bug fixing while implementing my
new feature. Go here, and then work on
my bug fix and create a different snapshot.
So this has only the bug fix. But
not the feature. And then finally, once I've
done these two separate things in parallel eventually
I want to incorporate them all into my
common source code that has both the feature
and the bug fix. So eventually I might
author a new snapshot by merging the changes
present in these two different snapshots. And so
this one will have both of these snapshots
as parents. And this version here will have
both the feature and my bug fix. So
does it make sense why get models history
in a way that's a little bit fancier
than just a sequence of snapshots of my
files and folders? Why I want to be
able to support branching to work on things
in parallel and then also merging to combine
changes from different parallel branches of development. Question?
When you merge things, it seems like you
could create errors that weren't anticipated. Yeah. So
that's an excellent point. It seems that when
you merge things, you could create errors that
weren't anticipated. You could imagine here that this
feature actually changes something that makes this bug
fix redundant or you could imagine this bug
fix breaking this feature or something like that.
That's a really good point that's something known
as merge conflicts and this is something that
Git will try to do, like when you
merge two parallel branches of development, it will
try to automatically combine the changes in a
way such that it retains all the important
changes. But, if it gets confused, it will
report a merge conflict and then leave it
up to you, the programmer, to figure out
how to combine, kind of concurrent changes to
the same files or things like that. And
git has some tools for facilitating this. Any
other questions? Great. Okay. So now we have
a model of files and folders, and then
we have a model of history. How different
snapshots of our code relate to each other.
One little detail here is that each of
these circles So they kind of correspond to
a snapshot like a tree with files and
folders, but they also have a little bit
of metadata. So like inside here we might
have like the author of this commit is
niche and we might have other metadata like
some message associated with this commit. And I
might describe what kinds of changes I've made
that are present in this snapshot but not
the previous one. That is not related to
our class. So next we're going to talk
about kind of one level lower than this,
like how exactly is this represented as a
as a data structure inside git? And so
I'm actually gonna write down pseudocode because I
think it's actually easiest to understand this way.
So first we have files. So a blob
is just a bunch of bytes. So I'll
say this is an array of bytes. Okay.
Then what is a tree? Remember that this
is just a folder. What are folders? They're
mappings from the file name or directory name
to the actual contents. And the contents are
either another tree, like a subtree, or the
file. And then finally, we have the last
thing there, what I've been calling snapshots so
far. In git terminology, those are called commits.
And so what is a commit? It's a
bunch of stuff. Commits have parents that describe
what precede them. So in the case of
most normal commits, they have one parent like
what they came from, but merge commits can
have multiple parents. So parents are an array
of commits. And then I have some metadata
like the author and maybe a message. And
then finally, the actual contents, the snapshot, which
is a tree, that's the top level tree
corresponding to a particular commit. So this is
a really clean, simple model of history. And
this is basically all there is to how
git models history. Any questions about that? Alright.
So now we have that. Going a little
bit deeper, let's talk about how git actually
stores and addresses this actual data. Like, at
some point, this actually has to turn to
data on disk. Right? So git defines an
object, kind of a vague sounding term, but
an object is any one of those three
things. So it's a blob or a tree
tree or a commit. And then in git,
all objects are content addressed. So what git
maintains on disk and you can actually we
can look at this later, is a set
of objects maintained as this content address store.
So if you have any one of these
objects, way you put it into the store
is its key is the hash of the
object. So like in pseudocode, I might say
that to store a particular object o, what
I do is I compute its ID by
taking the SHA one hash of o, and
then I put it into my objects map,
store it to disk. Quick show of hands,
Who here knows what a hash function is?
Alright. So I'll quickly summarize. Basically a hash
function is you can think of it as
like this magical function that takes a big
piece of data and turns it into a
short string. At a high level, these are
used to or maybe that's like a sufficient
explanation. I won't go into too much more
detail here, but you can ask me afterwards
if you're if you're curious. So basically, they
give you a way to name a thing
in a way that's kind of deterministic based
on the contents of the thing. It takes
in the thing as input and gives you
a short name for it. And then the
opposite of store is load, the way we
can load things from the store you might
have just guessed, you can look them up
by their ID and this is just we
retrieve it from the object store by ID
and it gives us back the contents. Any
questions about this so far? Question? What language
is this all written in? That's a good
question. What language is this all written in?
It's written in the language I just made
up. So it's pseudocode. The git implementation itself
is a mix of C. It's mostly C
and then some bash and Perl scripts I
think. Any other questions? Is this made up
language clear enough or do I need to
explain any aspects of it? Great. Okay. So
blobs, trees and commits in git are unified
in this way. They're all objects. And also
as you might think given my description here
like it looks like commits contain a whole
bunch of other commits and contain a snapshot
and things like that. In practice it doesn't
actually work that way. Instead all these are
pointers so a commit will be able to
reference a bunch of parents by their IDs.
So this is actually not an array of
commits themselves, but IDs. And similarly, the snapshot
inside a commit is not the actual tree
object, it's the ID of the tree. So
all these objects are kind of stored on
their own in this object store and then
all the references to different objects are just
by their ID, by their SHA-one hash. Does
that make sense? You can almost in your
head map it to like, these are objects
in a programming language like Java and then
this is a reference to a tree, it's
like a pointer and then that is your
RAM. Maybe this analogy helps, maybe it doesn't.
There's a memory model for storing all this
stuff that Yeah. You're not telling it about,
but Yeah. Exactly. So I'll just repeat that
for everybody to hear on the microphone. This
is gits on disk data store. It's a
content address store where objects are addressed by
their hash. Alright. Any questions about that so
far? Okay. So now we have a way
of identifying we've we've unified all the different
types of objects into one type of thing
we call object, and we have a way
of identifying objects by their SHA-one hash. What
do these actual SHA-one hashes look like? Well,
they're hexadecimal strings that are 40 characters long,
like SHA-one is a 160 bit hash. And
so, one of the actual IDs returned by
that SHA-one function is gonna be a really
long string. And, so, given that, we'll have
ways of identifying these different things. Like, this
will have corresponding to it an ID like
4AF32CBSomething something. So now we have a way
of naming everything in this commit graph. But
these names are really inconvenient because they're super
long and they're like hex strings, they're not
meaningful to humans in any way. So git's
solution to this problem is one other thing.
So git maintains a set of objects and
then it maintains a set of references. What
are references? Here. I'll erase this bit on
the left since this part's pretty logical. Let's
see how we're doing on time. So references
are here. So this is another piece of
data that Git maintains internally. References is a
map from string to string. And you can
think of this as mapping human readable names.
Like I might have a name like fix
encoding bug. Fix dash encoding dash bug is
a human readable name. And this would be
mapped to like that long hexadecimal string there.
And so with these references, and you can
imagine how we might have ways of creating
new references and updating references and things like
that. With this I can now refer to
things in my commit graph by name. So
I might have this thing be called like
fix bug or I might have a name
for something over here, things like that. And
so, yeah, with this, Git can use human
readable names to refer to particular snapshots in
the history instead of these long hexadecimal strings.
One other thing to be aware of here
is given Git's design for history, this entire
graph is actually immutable. You can add new
stuff to it, but you can't actually manipulate
anything in here. I won't go into the
details of exactly how or why, but just
assume that that's the case. However, references are
immutable. So, as you're updating the history, like,
suppose you keep working on this piece of
software, you create a new commit. So, I'm
representing that by the circle. This points to
the previous commit. I can actually have say,
my fixed bug reference was pointing here, I
can update this reference to now point over
here. However, I can't, for example, make this
point over here, that's not even a meaningful
thing to say, because this is just the
hash of this object. To change this hash,
I'd need to change the contents of the
object, which doesn't really make sense. Alright. Any
questions about that so far? That's basically it
for git's data model. And then we'll go
into actually interacting with git via the command
line, and we'll see how git commands correspond
with manipulations of a graph data structure. So
any questions about modeling history as trees of
trees and blobs, and then snapshots of these
things called commits being chained together? And you
have references that can point to particular nodes
in this graph. Cool. No questions. So basically
once we have objects and references Like that's
basically all there is to a git repository.
Those are just the the two pieces of
data that it stores. And at a high
level, all git command line commands are just
manipulations of either the references data or the
objects data. Okay. So for the rest of
this lecture, I'm going to go through some
git commands. It's basically going to be an
interactive demo similar to the Vim lecture, and
then you can refer to the notes for
full information on these commands. Like, of course,
this is a really powerful tool. We can't
cover everything in, what, twenty minutes. Alright. So,
I'm going to go over to this folder
called playground, and I'm going to make a
new directory called demo, cd into demo. And,
this directory is going to represent the top
level of my project. It's currently empty because
I just created it. If I want to
turn this into a git repository I use
the git init command. Git init stands for
git initialize and we see that it says
initialized empty git repository in blah blah blah
slash dot git. If I do ls I
still see nothing but if I do ls
dash a there's a hidden file in this
directory called dot git. If I do ls
dot git there's a bunch of stuff in
here. This is the directory on disk where
it get stores all of its internal data,
namely the objects and the references. And you
actually see here objects and refs as two
directories in here, and all the repository data
will be stored underneath those two directories. One
other command to keep in mind as we're
going through these is something called git help.
Git help takes a sub command as an
argument and gives you some help on it.
So if I do git help init for
example, it'll tell me about the git init
command. So now, there are some commands for
figuring out what's going on with the git
repository like git status at a high level
says, what is going on right now? And
we see here Let's ignore the first line
for now. The second line says no commits
history yet. I'm actually going to Does anybody
still want this or can I clear this
part of the board? I'm going to, as
we go along, draw how the underlying objects
and references data is changing when I type
in certain git commands. So right now this
picture or lack of picture represents the current
state of our repository. It's empty. There are
no snapshots. So let's fix that. Let's add
something to our history. Here we have no
files, so let me just go ahead and
create a file hello. Txt with the content
hello world. Normally you'd have your source code
with actually useful stuff in it. Now, what
I want to do is I want to
take the current contents of this directory and
turn it into a new snapshot to represent
say the first state my project was in.
You might imagine an interface for doing this
where there's like a git snapshot command or
git something else command which takes a snapshot
of the entire state of the current directory.
For a number of reasons, git doesn't have
a command that works exactly like that because
git wants to give you a little bit
of flexibility as to what changes to include
in the next snapshot you take. This is
something that's kind of confusing to beginners sometimes,
so I'll try to explain it right now.
Git has a concept of something called a
staging area, and at a high level it's
a way you tell git what changes should
be included in the next snapshot you take.
If we do git status here, we'll see
that git says no commits yet like it
said before and it says untracked files hello
dot txt. So this is saying that git
notices that there's a new file in the
current directory but it is not going to
be included in the next snapshot git's kind
of ignoring it for now. But if I
do git add hello. Txt and if I
do git status again, it says now changes
to be committed new file hello. Txt. And
so now if I do the git snapshot
command which is actually git commit, which creates
a new one of those circles I drew
on the board over there. This file will
be included in that snapshot I take. So
let me go ahead and run git commit.
What this does is it pops up my
text editor and it lets me type in
a message that will be associated with this
commit. And it's really good to write high
quality commit messages because then later when you're
looking back at your products version history you'll
know why you made certain changes. I'm going
to add this relatively useless commit message but
we have a link in the lecture notes
for a guide on how to write high
quality commit messages. So now that I've done
that, git prints out some output. Master ignore
that bit for now. This thing is the
hash of the commit I just created. So
now I have in my history a single
node. This has in it a tree that
has a single blob, a single file hello
dot txt with the contents hello world. And
then, this has the SHA one hash four
two f b something something something. It's actually
truncated in the git interface as well. This
is just printing out my commit message again,
and it says, as a reminder, I just
added hello dot txt. And so now if
I use the git log command, so the
git log command is really useful in that
it helps you visualize the history, the the
commit graph. If I do Question? The hash
of the 42 f number, is that for
the entire tree or just for the function
alone? Hello? That's a great question. So the
question is what exactly does this hash correspond
to? So this is the hash of the
commit. The commit contains inside of it the
hash of the tree along with whatever other
information. So I can actually use, git cat
file dash p this number. This is kind
of like a git internals command that will
print out the contents of this commit. So
you can see this kind of maps to
that data structure I drew on the board
over there. So this commit has inside of
it this tree, and then I'm the author,
and this is the commit message, and so
on. And I can continue digging down here,
so I can take this hash of this
tree and do git cat file dash p
this hash. Here it says that this tree
has inside of it a single entry hello.
Txt, and that file has it's a blob
and it has this hash. I can do
git cat file -p this thing, and it
will show me the actual contents of that
file. So these are like internal git commands
to explore objects in the object store. Question?
Why do you have to add files explicitly
to commit? Why can't you commit That's a
great question. So the question is why do
I have to use git add? Why can't
you just commit all changes? And the answer
is well there kind of is a way
to commit all changes. If you do git
commit -a this commits all the changes that
were made to files that are already being
tracked by git. So anything that was included
in the previous snapshot but has been modified
since then. It doesn't include new things. There's
also variants of git add, like if you
do git add colon slash, this will add
everything in the top from the top level
down of your repository. But at a higher
level, the reason we have the separation between
git add and git commit and why git
commit doesn't just snapshot the entire directory is
that there are often situations where you don't
want to include everything in the current snapshot.
Like, here's a couple examples. One is that
I might be hacking on my project and
I go ahead and implement two features. Maybe
I don't want to have a single snapshot
that comes after this one that's like I
implemented feature A and feature B. Maybe I
want to create two separate nodes in the
history so that it looks like first I
implemented feature a and then after that I
implemented feature b. So I have one snapshot
that only includes a and then the next
one includes both a and b. Git add
is a tool and like the staging area
in general is a tool that will allow
me to do that sort of thing. Another
example is suppose I'm working on a bug
fix and I have printf statements I've put
all over my code, then finally I find
the bug and there's a plus one somewhere
where there shouldn't be a plus one, so
I go fix that. And then I want
to take a new snapshot, right, with my
fix. But the snapshot probably shouldn't include all
of my print statements, just needs to include
the fix of removing that plus one. So
one way I could solve that issue is
I can go and manually remove all the
print statements, but git has a much better
way of doing that. There's actually a way
to specify that I only want to add
the change of removing that plus one, then
I can commit that, take the new snapshot,
and then I can throw away all the
other changes. There are commands for doing that
and some of them are linked in the
lecture notes. So those are two ways in
which you can use the staging area to
help you and why there isn't just like
a snapshot everything command. Log files. Is another
example. Files in your directory. Yeah. John points
out that yet another example is you might
have log files in your current directory that
your program runs when you run it, and
you probably don't want to include those when
you take a snapshot. There's probably other things
like if you compile your project, end up
with a bunch of .o and like .f
files. You probably don't want those to be
part of your history. So, going back to
what I was showing you before, I'm gonna
clear the terminal screen and then show you
the git log command. So git log lets
you visualize the version history, and this is
an incredibly helpful command. By default git log
shows you a flattened version of the version
history. So even though the version history is
a graph this will linearize it and just
show things in order. I personally find that
confusing so I almost never use git log
and instead git log takes some arguments that
actually show the history as a graph. So,
you can treat this as a magic incantation
for now, and you can read the documentation
if you want to figure out exactly what
each of those flags does. But, for now
this doesn't look all that different because we
only have one node in our graph. So
visualizing it as a flattened thing versus a
graph doesn't look all that different. Let me
go ahead and create a new snapshot and
then we can run this command again and
then see exactly what it does. So, I
will put another line into hello dot text.
And so, if I cat hello dot text
it has the thing it had before plus
this, I can do git commit and notice
this doesn't do anything. It just says no
state No changes staged for commit. Why is
that? It's because I didn't add this to
the staging area. I didn't tell git that
like this is something that should be included
in the next snapshot. So if I do
git add hello dot txt, git status, it
says, okay, this change is ready to be
committed, this modification to this file. And now
I can do git commit. I'm gonna put
in a useless commit message, and the new
change has been made. And so now, my
history has another node in it, and then
this node has some hash that's shown on
the screen. And now if I rerun that
command from earlier, the git log with all
these arguments, it actually starts looking more like
a graph here. Notice that this is like
that graph turned this way. The more recent
so it's shown vertically not horizontally, and the
more recent commits are shown at the top.
This is showing one commit. It shows this
commit hash shows a bunch of metadata including
the commit message. And then, this is the
part I want to talk about next. So
remember we talked about objects, like the actual
contents of your repository. And then we talked
about references ways of naming things in the
repository with human readable names. So master is
one reference that's created by default when you
initialize a git repository and by convention it
generally refers to the main branch of development
in your code. So master will represent the
most up to date version of your project.
So here, you can think of master as
a pointer to this commit. And as we
add more commits, this pointer will be mutated
to point to later commits. Then we also
see here head, this is a special reference
in git. It's a reference like master but
it's special in some way and head basically
is used to refer to where you are
currently looking right now. Any questions so far?
Yeah, question? That's an excellent question. So the
question is, worked with GitHub before and you
have to create an account to do that.
How does GitHub relate to Git? And the
answer to that question is GitHub is a
repository host for Git. So you can create
an account on git hub and store a
git repository there and use that to collaborate
with other people. But, git as a command
line tool is independent from git hub. So,
you don't have to use git hub to
use git. You don't have to use git
hub to collaborate with git either, like there
are other providers of git repositories like Bitbucket
or GitLab or things like that. And so,
GitHub is a host for GitHub repositories. Any
other questions? GitHub, not GitHub. We make this
Git, right? The head and the master, and
we have two things in it, shown in
the graph. If we want to put it
up on GitHub, that's a separate set of
commands and need for log in and stuff
like that. Yeah. So the the question is
if you want this repository to end up
on GitHub, how do you do that? Yeah.
There's a separate set of commands for doing
that. There's a so that concept of having
your local copy of version history interact with
another copy, so the other copy is called
a remote, and then there's set of commands
for interacting with git remotes and sending data
from your remote or from your copy to
git remotes and getting data from git remotes
into your local copy. And we'll cover that
later in this lecture, or maybe in the
lecture notes, Ron might make a supplemental video
to go along with this lecture. Any other
questions? Okay. A couple other basic commands to
show you. So, so far, I've shown you
a version history and we've taken a file
and modified it. But we haven't really made
use of the history in any way besides
reading the messages. So one useful git command
is something called git checkout. And this is
a kind of wacky command, it lets you
do a bunch of different things. One thing
it lets you do is move around in
your version history. So one thing I can
do is give git checkout the commit hash
of a previous commit, and I don't need
to type the whole thing I can give
it a prefix and it's smart enough to
figure out what I'm talking about. And what
this will do is it will change the
state of my working directory to how it
was at that commit. So here if I
do cat hello dot text recall that I
had only one line in here before at
the first commit and later I added that
second line. Now if I do that git
log command, this command is super helpful, like
it shows you all the things. If I
do this command, notice that this output looks
a little bit different than before. Like, my
actual history contents, the commits themselves and the
way they relate to each other and all
that, have not changed, but the references have.
So notice that head is down here even
the master is still up here. So at
high level what this is telling me is
this is what I'm looking at right now.
If I want to go back here I
could type git checkout and this commit hash.
Does anybody know a different thing I could
type here instead of this long hash in
order to go back to this commit? Yeah.
You can give it the name of this
is a branch colored in green here, and
it refers to this commit, I can give
it the short name or the human readable
name instead. And now if I do cat
hello dot text, notice that it has that
second line. So, when you do checkout, it
is actually replacing the file in your current
directory with the files of lots that has
stored. Yeah. So all your files so it's
like you can change a whole bunch of
files without even realizing it. Yeah. So to
to repeat that, git checkout actually changes the
contents of your working directory. And so in
that way, it can be a somewhat dangerous
command if you misuse it. For example, you
can see if I modify hello. Txt and
then try that git checkout command from earlier
Actually, notice here that it says error. It
says there's a file that's been modified and
the git checkout would destroy your modification. You
probably want to do something about that. But
there are flags like for example git checkout
dash f does this forcibly and now it's
thrown away my changes. So, yeah, git checkout
has the potential to well, certainly does modify
things in your working directory and it can
actually destroy changes if you're not careful. Question?
So then, in the in the lingo here,
checkout moves where head is. Exactly. Okay. Yeah.
This is exactly what I want you to
be thinking about. How these, like, the crazy
git interface commands correspond to mutations to this
graph and mutations to the reference or like
additions to the graph and mutations to the
references map. So yeah exactly. Git checkout moves
the head pointer and then also mutates the
contents of your working directory with the contents
that the head pointer now points to, corresponding
to that commit. Any other questions? Alright. So,
one other basic command I want to show
you is the git diff command. So, I'm
going to modify this file and put some
changes in it. The git diff command can
show you what's changed since the last snapshot.
It's just helpful for like knowing what's going
on with your project. Git diff can also
take extra arguments like, you can do git
diff and say compute a diff not with
respect to the last snapshot, the last commit
but with respect to this and say okay
two lines have been added since this point
to hello dot text Question? So, you don't
supply like a hash, what it compares to?
Ah, so your The question is, what does
this command do without this extra argument here?
That's a good question. So, what this does
is it computes a diff with respect to
head. And, looking at my git log, head
is pointing to here, so it's doing a
git diff with respect to this commit and
you can actually specify that explicitly you can
do git diff head hello dot text and
it will do the same thing. Isn't head
wherever head is isn't it going to like
modify hello to I guess I don't understand
how head can be somewhere and hello can
be different from like where head is on
the ground. Does that make I am confused.
Okay. Yes. So that's a good question. It's
like how can hello dot text be different
than head because head refers to where you
currently are. So to clarify, head refers to
the last snapshot. So like in my picture
here, head and master are both here. And
the current working directory is kind of independent
of this. Like, could go and delete all
the files in here. It doesn't change the
history graph or the references. And so, yeah,
you can have differences between here and here.
And at a high level, this is how
you work on a project. Like, you make
some changes here, you git add them to
stage them, and then you git commit, and
that creates a new snapshot here. Good question.
Any other questions? Yeah? So is git actually
saving all of these different versions, like, the
way I would if I saved version one
version two etcetera or is it somehow just
keeping track of certain differences? So the question
is does git actually save all this stuff
kind of in the obvious way or is
it doing something fancier? The answer is is
it is doing something a little bit fancier,
but you can it has an interface that
lets you think of it like it's stored
that way. In practice git uses delta compression,
it also does some other stuff. But yeah,
the on disk representation is actually reasonably efficient.
Question? Say I want to compare to the
difference between two different things that are somewhere
back up my history. Can I pick just
too many arbitrary points of difference? Yeah, that's
a good question. So the question is, here
we were comparing the current working directory with
a particular snapshot in the past. Can we
compare two snapshots with each other? Like two
different points in the history and yeah git
diff can take yet another argument here. So
I can for example compare head with I
did it in the wrong order. I can
compare what changed from here to head in
hello dot text and it shows me that
I added the second line in there. Any
other questions? Yeah. So the question is, if
you're working on a shared project in a
Dropbox folder and I want to migrate to
git, does it make sense to turn the
Dropbox folder into a git repo? Do not
use git inside Dropbox. Dropbox will corrupt your
git repo. There are good solutions to doing
that. One is just use GitHub, otherwise talk
to me after class and there are ways
of using Dropbox as a git remote safely.
Any other questions? Next, we're going to talk
about branching and merging, which is another powerful
feature of git that you almost certainly use
both when working on your own projects and
when collaborating with others. For this series of
demos we're going to, rather than work with
a simple text file actually write a simple
computer program because it'll better illustrate the concepts
of branching and merging. As we go through
this demonstration we'll keep in mind how the
git interface commands connect to the underlying data
model connect to objects and references and how
these commands modify those two data structures. Let
me do a git status to see the
current state of my repository. Here I've modified
hello. Txt. I actually don't really care about
this modification anymore. This is some random file.
If I do git checkout hello. Txt, this
is another different use of the checkout command
which basically throws away the changes that I've
made in the working directory and sets the
contents of hello. Txt back to the way
it was in the snapshot that head points
to. If I look at git log dash
dash all dash dash graph dash dash decorate,
it'll show me that here I added the
initial holo dot text and I'd added that
single line here, and so now holo dot
text doesn't have that third line I'd added,
it just has the original two. Next, I'm
going to write a very simple program. I'll
call this program animal. Py. And, let me
just go ahead and write a program that,
say, prints a little bit of output when
I run it. Let's see. So when I
run this program it runs main, main calls
default and then let me go right ahead,
Go ahead and define default and default is
going to just going to print hello. So,
this is a program that greets its user.
And so, if I run animal. Py I'll
see that it just prints hello. So, that'll
be our starting point. If I do a
git status it shows me that animal. Py
is an untracked file. To begin with I
want this to be part of my part
of the snapshot. So, I'm going to git
add animal. Py to add it to the
staging area and do then do a git
commit. Here I'm gonna write yet another useless
commit message. Don't actually write commit messages like
this in real projects, but for now this
is fine. So, now I have this basic
animal dot py and if I look at
my git history, now I have this latest
snapshot. This is the commit hash and this
is where the master branch is pointing. Now
we're actually going to demonstrate how to use
git branches to have parallel lines of development.
The git branch command or the branch sub
command is used to access functionality related to
branching. Just running git branch by itself lists
all the branches that are present in the
local repository. It can also take an extra
argument dash v v to be extra verbose
and print some extra information. If we do
git branch and then specify the name for
a new branch, git will create a new
branch which is just a reference that points
the same place where we're currently looking. So,
there's a new reference called cat Reference in
this case is the same as branch. There's
a new branch called cat which points to
wherever head was pointing. If I look at
the git log again, I'll see that here
head points to master, master is over here,
and this is also where the cat branch
is. So, now I have two branches, two
references that resolve to the same commit. Git
is actually aware of not only which snapshot
in the history you're currently looking at, so
head points to this commit, but it's also
aware of head kind of being associated with
a with a branch. So, here head is
associated with master and it's the case that
if I create a new snapshot if I
type git commit at this point the next
snapshot will be created and then master will
point to that new snapshot. Master will be
updated along with head. If I do git
checkout cat, what this does is it switches
to the branch cat. It replaces the contents
of the working directory with whatever cat's pointing
to, which in this case is the same
as the contents before. But now if I
look at the git log again, now I
have head point to cat instead of master
and then master also points to the same
place the same underlying commit. And now at
this point if I make changes to my
current working directory and make a new commit
the cat branch the cat pointer will be
updated to point to the new commit whereas
master will continue pointing wherever it pointed before.
So let me go ahead and modify animal.
Py to add some cat related functionality. So
I'm going to say that if sys. Argv1
is cat, then run the cat function otherwise
run the default function. And then let me
go ahead and import, define the cat function.
So, cats don't say hello, they meow. So,
cat prints meow. Straightforward enough. So, now if
I run animal. Py and give it the
cat argument, it says meow. If I give
it some other argument, it defaults back to
the hello. Alright. So, a simple change I
made. If I do a git status it
says that animal. Py has been modified. If
I run git diff, it'll show me what's
changed since the last commit. So, here I've
added this cat function highlighted in green and
also change the main function a little bit.
Now, here if I do git add animal.
Py git commit, I'm gonna actually write a
slightly more useful commit message this time. I'm
gonna add cat functionality. And now if I
look at the git log, I see a
little more stuff. I'm gonna show you one
more argument to this git log command. There's
an argument dash dash one line one line
spelled correctly, which shows a more compact representation
of the graph. So, this will be a
more useful thing to use because we're super
zoomed into the screen and there isn't that
much space to show a long commit history.
So, here we see the sequence of commits
is still linear and we have master still
pointing wherever pointed before where we just had
the basic underlying animal. Py functionality. But, now
we have this cat branch which adds the
cat functionality. We could for example git checkout
master to go back to the master branch
and then here if we look at animal.
Py it doesn't have the cat functionality anymore.
If we look at the git log we'll
see that head is pointing to master. So,
so we can jump back and forth between
parallel lines of development. So, now that we
have the cat functionality suppose that we want
to work on adding dog functionality in parallel
and suppose that in this case like the
cat functionality is under development or maybe somebody
else is working on it. So, we just
want to start from the base master commit
and build the dog functionality starting from there.
So, now what do I want to do?
I want to create a new branch dog
for adding the dog related functionality and I'll
eventually merge it in later. So I can
use the git branch dog command followed by
the git checkout dog command to create a
new dog branch and then check it out.
There's actually a short form for this git
checkout dash b dog. So, this does git
branch dog, git checkout dog. And now, if
I look at my graph, I have cat
where it was before, master where it was
before, but now head, instead of pointing to
master as it did before, now head points
to this newly created dog reference which is
also at the same commit. So, at this
base commit. And now I'll go ahead and
add my dog functionality. So, me go and
define my dog function. Dogs don't say hello,
they say woof and then I'll add some
similar functionality here to decide whether to run
default or dog. So if the first argument
is dog, then I want to run the
dog function otherwise otherwise I want to run
the default function. So, here's what I've changed
with respect to the base commit wherever master
is pointing. So, I've added the dog function
and I've changed main a little bit. So,
a kind of parallel modification to what I
did in the branch. Let me go ahead
and get add animal.pyatus, add it to the
staging area. If I do get status I'll
see that this change will be committed when
I make the next commit. And, I do
get commit add dog functionality. Now, when I
look at the git graph it actually looks
kind of interesting compared to the ones we've
looked at before. This shows that these three
commits are in common with the ones that
come after it, but then the history is
actually forked after this point and I have
this one commit that adds cat functionality in
one line of development, and then I have
this other commit that adds dog functionality in
this other line of development. And then using
the git checkout command I can switch back
and forth between dog and cat and master.
So, is great. I can do development in
parallel on different features but this is only
really useful if I can eventually combine those
things back into my original line of development
to have both features in a single version
of my source code. So, the command that's
used to do that is git merge. So,
like git branch and git merge can kind
of be thought of as opposites. Let me
check out git checkout master. Let me check
out my master branch. So now I see
head points to master and then I want
to merge the cat functionality and the dog
functionality into master. And to do that I
can use the git merge command. And git
merge is actually pretty fancy and I can
actually merge cat and dog at the same
time. But for this demonstration we're going to
only merge one thing at a time. So
first I'll type git merge cat and git
says some stuff. Here it says fast forward.
So what is going on here? Well this
is one interesting thing that git can do
when you're at a particular commit and you
merge some other branch in where that other
branch has the current commit as a predecessor.
It's not necessary to create any new snapshots
or do any other fancy stuff. Basically this
this master branch here, this pointer to this
commit, can just be moved to point here
instead to incorporate that cat functionality. And, so
if we look at the git log again,
we see that master is basically pointing to
the same places wherever cat was pointing. Alright.
So, now we're on the master branch and
it has the cat functionality. Great. We're halfway
there. If we look at animal. Py, has
the cat functionality, but it's missing the dog
stuff. So, let's try git merge dog next.
Something a little bit more interesting happens this
time. So, this time the branch can't be
fast forwarded like it was before. It's not
that one thing which is strictly older than
the other thing. There's been parallel development that
may be kind of incompatible with the current
set of changes. And so git does its
best job at automatically merging the changes from
this other branch. So it says auto merging
animal. Py, but in this particular case there's
what was what's called a merge conflict. So,
it wasn't able to automatically resolve on the
all the conflicts between these two parallel branches
of development. And, this is something you'll see
in practice when you're working on real software
projects, and they're complicated slightly incompatible changes happening
in parallel. So, at this point it's left
up to the developer to fix this issue
and git offers, some functionality in order to
help resolve merge conflicts. There's a program called
git merge tool and in my particular setup
this will launch Vimdiff. Well actually this is
not configured. Vimdiff, I think, will start the
right program. Let me set up my git
to launch the correct tool. Actually, let's skip
that part and let's just manually look at
this. Vimdiff, there's a program called Vimdiff which
can be set up to be launched when
you type in git merge tool which is
a tool that you use when you try
git merge and there are merge conflicts. But,
in this particular case we'll just manually resolve
them. So, me I did git merge dash
dash abort, so it put me back in
the state I was before I tried that
git merge. So, this is the current state
of my repository and back to the case
where master is at the same place as
cat and I'm about to merge in dog.
So, do get merge dog and it says
conflict merge conflict in animal.py. So, let's just
look at animal.py directly. So, it looks like
this top part looks pretty reasonable. It has
both the cat function and the dog function,
which is exactly what I want. But, now
I see some weird stuff in main and
this is where I had slightly incompatible changes.
So, here it says that in one thing
like basically the branch you were on you
had this content and then the branch you're
trying to merge had this content and then
these things here the angle brackets and the
equals are conflict markers. So, is where you
were and this is the thing you're trying
to merge in And, it's basically saying that
it was this on one case, this in
the other case, and git doesn't really know
how to resolve these two. And, it's left
up to the programmer to fix this problem.
So, in this particular case, we can go
ahead and delete the conflict markers, and then
turns out that we can actually concatenate this
code together and does the right thing. Maybe
we want to make a small change like
this should be an if, this should be
an else if, and this should be an
else. That might make a little bit more
sense. Actually, I think it's necessary for correctness
here. So, the programmer needed to modify the
code a little bit in order to make
it sensible when it's merged together. But, once
the programmer has fixed the merge conflicts, fixed
the stuff between the conflict markers, you can
save this file and we can do git
merge dash dash continue to tell git that
we fixed the issues. It's necessary to re
add animal. Py to tell git that we've
actually fixed these issues and then we need
to git merge dash dash continue it pops
up an editor and we can give a
commit message for this new commit that we're
about to create. And now if you look
at the git history we have the single
commit that represents our merge commit that we
just made which merges in the dog functionality
and here this has as parents both the
dog commit and the cat commit. So, both
these branches appear in our history from this
point backwards And, this current commit that we're
on incorporates the functionality from both of these
branches. So, if we run animal. Py with
cat, it does the cat thing. If we
run it with dog, it does the dog
thing. And, if we run it with anything
else, it falls back to the default implementation.
So, is a demonstration of how you branch
in git to do development on different things
in parallel and then how you can use
the merge command in git to resolve those
different branches and combine them together into a
single snapshot that includes all the functionality that
was developed in parallel with each other. Then
one thing that can happen when you're doing
git branching and merging is you run into
merge conflicts and these conflicts show up as
conflict markers and text files you can manually
resolve them and git also has some tools
that can help with this though these tools
are kind of advanced and we'll only refer
to them in the lecture notes and not
actually demonstrate them for you. So that's git
branching and merging. Any questions? No? Great. So,
moving on to the next topic of this
lecture, we will talk about git remotes. So,
this is basically how you collaborate with other
people using git. A git repository, the stuff
contained in this dot git folder, represents kind
of an entire copy of the history. It
has the objects and the references and contains
all the previous snapshots. And, the way you
collaborate with other people using git is that
other people can also have copies of the
entire Git repository and then your Git copy,
your local, instantiation of the repository can be
aware of the existence of other clones of
the same repository and this is a concept
known as remotes. So, the git remote command
will list all the remotes that git is
aware of for the current repository and in
our case with this repository right here this
command git remote just doesn't print anything because
we haven't configured any remotes. Git is only
aware of the single local copy of the
repository that we're working with here. But, in
practice, if you're collaborating with other people, your
git might be aware of the copy of
the code that is on GitHub. And then,
there's a set of commands to send changes
from your local copy of the repository to
a remote that your git is aware of.
So, sending stuff from your computer to GitHub,
for example. And there's another set of commands
for fetching changes made in a local repository
to get changes from GitHub into your own
local copy. In this demonstration here, we actually
won't go and configure a GitHub account and
log in and create a new repository on
there. You can find other tutorials for doing
that we'll actually just use a separate folder
on the same computer and treat it like
a git remote so let me I'm in
the demo folder here let me go up
one directory I have a directory called playground
that has this demo folder and I'll go
ahead and create a new directory in here
and I'll call it remote and then do
git init dash dash bear in here. This
is a command that you'll probably never need
to use in regular usage but now what
I've done is made remote into a folder
that's appropriate to use as a git remote.
So, going back into my demo folder here,
my main repository, I can do git remote
to list the remotes. There's nothing yet But
I can use the git remote add functionality
to make my local repository aware of the
existence of, of a remote. So I can
do git remote add and then the format
for this is that remotes have names and
then they have a URL. So, this case
I'll use the name origin that's often used
by convention as the name of the remote
if you're only using one and then for
the URL normally this will be like a
github URL or something like that or bit
bucket URL or git lab URL if you're
using an online repository hosting service but in
this case it's just a path to a
folder on my local machine there's a folder
in the parent directory called remote that will
act as the git remote for this repository.
So, now once I've done that there's a
set of commands for interacting with this remote.
One command that's useful is the git push
command. This command can send the changes from
your computer to the remote and the format
for this command is that git push takes
in the name of remote and then it
takes in a local branch name colon a
remote branch name and what it does is
it creates a new branch or updates a
branch on the remote with the name specified
here and sets it to the contents of
the branch specified here. So, a concrete use
of this might look like git push. I
have only one remote called origin. And then,
what should I push? Let me look at
my history graph. I have a bunch of
things I could push let me get push
to origin the master branch from my local
machine colon master. So, I want to create
a branch on the remote machine with the
name master that is going to be the
same as the master branch on my local
machine. So, let me go ahead and run
that command. It prints out some stuff and
it says on the remote I created a
new branch, remote master points to the same
branch as master on my local machine. And,
now if I do a git log it
shows me So, in blue is head where
I currently am, in green are all the
branches in my local git repository and now
we see one new color here that we
hadn't seen before. So, in red git shows
references that are present on the remotes that
my local copy is aware of. So on
the remote origin there's also a branch that
happens to have the name master that points
to the same place as my local branch
master points. And so now if I make
updates to my local copy like suppose here
I go in and change the capitalization of
these things and then git add animal. Py
git commit. Here's a short form for commit
with a message so it doesn't pop up
the editor. I'll give it a lame commit
message and now if I look at the
git graph Now, I see that I've created
this new snapshot here that has this lower
casing stuff in it, but origin master is
still back here. So, if somebody else looks
at the remote they will only see the
changes up to here and we can actually
demonstrate this functionality. So, let me go ahead
and open up a new tab here, and
go into my playground directory. The git clone
command is a command that somebody can use
to start from some copy of repository somewhere
and make their own local copy. So, is
often a command you use when starting out
with a git repo like there might be
something available on github and you want to
copy it all in your machine in order
to look at it or start doing development.
And so the format for git clone is
that it takes in a URL and then
it takes in a name for a folder
for where to clone it. So in our
case here we're just going to clone from
this remote directory. We're pretending that this remote
folder is actually a remote machine. And then
we'll clone it into the folder called demo
two. So, cloning into demo two done. And,
I'm going to cd into that directory. And
then, now here I'm going to rename these
tabs at the bottom. We'll say this one's
machine one and this one's machine two. So
you can think of these as two different
people on different machines with their own copy
of the repository and they're both interacting with
the single remote. So if I do my
git log command that I've been doing on
machine one, I see on machine two, I
see this portion of the history. So, master
on machine two is pointing to the same
place as origin master and it says merge
branch dog. So if I look at animal.
Py here, it doesn't have the changes that
I made on machine two. Even though they're
Or, sorry, on machine one, where I have
this new commit that is only present on
this machine, but not on the remote and
not on machine two. So, I want to
fix that, if I want to send these
changes up to the remote, like think of
it as sending it up to GitHub or
up to the, machine that's holding, or maintaining
the source code, I can use the git
push command again. Git push origin master colon
master. And, this will work. But, this is
kind of annoying to type every time you
want to do this. Like, this is a
really common operation. So, git has a way
of making this a little bit simpler. It
has a way of maintaining relationships between branches
on your own local machine and branches on
remote machines. It is a way of knowing
what branch on a remote machine a local
branch corresponds to. So that you can type
in a shortened version of git push and
it'll know what all the arguments to the
expanded form would have been. And, there are
a couple different syntaxes for doing this. One
way is to use the git branch dash
dash set upstream to command. And what this
does is for the branch that's currently checked
out which is master it will set the
upstream to and I'll type in origin master
and see now it says branch master set
up to track remote branch master from origin.
Now if I type in git branch dash
v v remember this is tell me about
all the branches that I know about in
a very verbose way that's what the dash
v v means. I have three branches on
my local machine on machine one. I have
cat, dog and master and master on my
local machine corresponds to origin master. So now
I can type in just git push without
all the extra arguments. I could have done
this as git push origin master colon master
but it wasn't necessary. It'll know that I
want to push to origin master and it
will make that change. So now these changes
are present on the remote we can go
over to machine to pretend we're the other
guy interacting with this repository and if I
do my git log command I still don't
see the changes. So what's going on here?
Well it's necessary in order to run a
separate command or it's necessary to run a
separate command in order to have these changes
present here. By default all the git commands
don't talk to the internet. It all works
locally which means it works very fast but
then there are special commands for saying that
you want to retrieve changes that have been
made somewhere else. And, the command that's used
for doing that is a command called git
fetch. Git fetch takes the, as an argument,
the name of the remote but if there's
only one it'll just use that. So, you
can type in git fetch and then it
talks to this remote repository and it says
that there's some update on the remote and
we can visualize it by running git log
and now we see here another situation that
we hadn't seen before. We have master on
our local machine the master branch doesn't change.
The git fetch command doesn't change any of
our local history or local references like our
branches but now it's aware that origin master
has been updated to point to this new
commit. And, there's a separate command we can
do git merge in order to move master
up to here or there's another command called
git pull which is the same as doing
git fetch and then git merge. So if
we just do git pull here for example
it will say it's fast forwarding. It's merging
in origin master into our master. And, now
if we look at the git history graph,
we've currently checked out master. Master points to
the same place as the origin master that
we're aware of. And all the changes between
machine two and machine one are in sync.
So those are the basic commands for interacting
with git remotes. So there's the git remote
command for listing remotes and adding and removing
them and things like that And then there's
the git push command for sending changes from
your local copy of the repository to the
remote. And then there's the git fetch command
which is for retrieving changes for repository that
are present on a remote and getting the
changes on your local machine. And, once you
retrieve those changes, you can use git merge
to update your local branch to point to
the same place where the remote branch does.
Or, you can use the git pull command,
which does basically the same thing as git
fetch plus git merge. And then, of course,
separate from all these commands is the git
clone command that we talked about a little
while ago, which is for taking a copy
of remote repository and initializing a local repository
from that copy. So, that's a quick overview
of the different commands used to interact with
git remotes. And now, these are kind of
complicated and it takes a while to master
all the different variations of this and understand
how they're actually used in practice. But, hopefully
this acts as a quick introduction and you
can see how the different commands relate to
the underlying data model. All these commands, all
they do is fetch new objects from other
places or send objects from the local machine
to other places and these commands mutate references.
So, relating these relating the interface of git
and some of these kind of badly designed
commands to the underlying data model can help
it make a lot more sense. The final
topic we're going to cover today is it's
a kind of overview of other things that
git can do that we're not going to
go into detail in teaching you how to
do but we just want to tell you
that these functionalities exist in case you need
to do these things yourself you can look
up the documentation find out exactly how to
do it. One thing is the git config
command. Like a lot of tools we've looked
at like the shell and tmux and things
like that, git is highly configurable and it's
configured using a plain text file which can
be edited either through the command line interface
so git config can take in flags that
will modify this text file or you can
edit the .git config file in the home
folder with plain text configuration. And so for
this lecture I've actually cut out most of
my git config and only left in my
username and email for what will go into
git commits. But, there's a lot of stuff
you can put in here which will make
git behave nicer or behave the way you
want it to. And, you can look online
for different ways people have configured their git
configs. Oftentimes people have documentation in their git
configs which can be found on GitHub. There's
a couple other random commands that could be
useful. One is for when you want to
clone a repository with git clone that's really
gigantic. Git clone by default copies the entire
version history from the remote it's downloading the
repository from. But, there's an argument you can
pass it which is shallow which will avoid
doing that. So, if there's some copy of
some code on GitHub say that you want
to get a copy of on your local
machine, but that repository is really gigantic and
has a billion commits, if use git clone
shallow this will be much faster. But then
of course you won't have the version history
on your local machine. You'll just have the
latest snapshot. Another command that we find really
useful when doing development on real software projects
is an interactive version of the git add
command. So to demonstrate this I'm going to
go ahead and make a couple different changes
to my animal. Py. One change I'll make
here I'll change some text here and then
I'll put a new print statement here. So
let's pretend that this first change was some
real change I wanted to make, say it's
a bug fix, and this other change here
was a printf that I added for debugging
but I don't actually want to commit in
the next snapshot. If I do a git
diff it'll show me that yes I've made
these two changes and if I do git
add animal. Py it will stage both of
those changes for commit. And that's not what
I want. I could go manually remove this
debug print and then do this git animal.
Py. But there's an easier way to do
it. There's this git add dash p command
which lets me interactively stage pieces of files
for a commit and so there's some interface
for working with this. So here it's saying
do I want to stage both of these
changes and no I don't but I wanna
split it into two smaller changes. This one
I do want to keep, so I say
'y' for 'yes' and this one I don't
want to keep, so I say 'n' for
'no'. And then if I do git diff
dash dash cached this will show me what
changes are staged for commit. So now it
shows only the actual change I wanted to
keep. If I do git diff it'll still
show me the other change that is not
going to be part of the next next
commit which is the change I didn't want
to keep. And then with this I can
do git commit specify some commit message. Now
I only have this change left, and then
I can do git checkout animal. Py to
throw away this change. So, git add -p
for interactive staging is a useful thing. A
couple other commands that you can look up
on your own are the git blame command.
So, this command sounds kind of ominous, but
it can be used to figure out who
edited what line of a file. And, you
can also find the corresponding commit that was
responsible for modifying that particular line of that
file and then you can look up commit
messages associated with that and whatnot. So, is
not that interesting to do in our current
toy repository but I'll go over to the
repository for the class website and we can
look at some particular file here and let
me go to some particular line here and
I can be looking at this and be
like oh why was this particular line added
what does it mean and I can look
at the git blame for this so if
I do git blame config. Yml it'll print
out all the lines kind of in the
right column and then in the left side
it'll show me what commit that change was
made in and by whom and then looking
at this like I can go down to
this collections line. It was made in this
commit, that's the last commit that modified that
line and now I can use the git
show command to get information for that particular
commit. Oh, and this is kind of useful,
redo lectures as a collection. That's probably what
was related to that collections line. And then
beyond just showing the commit and the commit
message, it also shows me the actual changes
introduced in that particular commit and I can
go look through them and understand what's going
on. Another kind of cool command is a
command called git stash. So, let's go back
to our demo repository and demonstrate that here.
So, say if some changes here and I
temporarily want to put them away, if I
do git stash it will revert my working
directory to the state it was in at
the last commit. So if I do cat
hello dot txt that change is gone. But
it's not just deleted, it's saved somewhere. And
if I do git stash pop it will
undo the stash. So now if I look
at hello dot txt it has the changes
I made. So yet another useful command. Another
really neat command is something called git bisect
and this has a complicated interface that we're
not going to demonstrate in detail. But basically
this is a tool that can be used
to solve a bunch of problems where you
need to manually search history for something. Suppose
you're in a scenario where you've been working
on a project for a long time, you
have like lots and lots of snapshots, you're
a thousand commits in, and then you notice
that some unit test doesn't pass anymore. But
you know that this was passing like one
year ago and you're trying to figure out
at what point did it break like at
what point was this regression in your code
introduced. So one thing you could do is
manually check out like go back one commit
and see if the unit test is still
failing, go back one commit see if it's
still failing, and eventually you'll find the first
commit where the test stopped working and it'll
probably tell you like what broke. But, that's
kind of annoying to do manually. Git bisect
automates that process and it actually binary searches
your history. So it does this in the
most efficient way possible. And not only that,
git bisect can take in a script that
it uses to try to figure out whether
a commit it's looking at is good or
bad. So it can be a fully automated
process. Like you can give git bisect a
unit test and say find the first commit
where this unit test stopped passing. So, a
really powerful tool. Another random thing that's kind
of useful is something called a gitignore file.
So, by default if you have random files
in a directory like let me create the
dot ds underscore store file. Whoops. Create the
dot ds underscore store file and then do
git status. So ds store is like some
nuisance file that mac os creates. I don't
know exactly what goes in here But basically
once this file is in this directory now
whenever I do git status it says oh
there's this new file that I've never heard
of it before but it's apparently here like
do you want to add it? And this
sort of stuff stuff gets annoying and there's
a lot of other stuff beyond OS specific
garbage that might be in a directory. Like,
for example, if you're working with C code
you might compile it and produce dot o
files or executable files or things like that.
And, you probably don't want binaries to be
part of your commit history. You only want
the source code. And so git has a
way of you being able to tell the
tool that you don't care about a particular
set of files and to ignore them. And
that's something called a gitignore file. So if
I go and modify the file called .gitignore
in the current directory I can specify particular
file names or patterns of file names. Like
say I can specify star dot o, so
any file ending in dot o along with
dot ds store. And now if I touch
foo dot o and now do a git
status, I'll see that git says okay I
have hello. Txt which I modified sure and
then I have git ignore so you should
track your git ignore file using git but
notice that it doesn't mention my .ds store
file or my foo. O file that's present
in the current directory because that has been
git ignored. So that's a quick overview of
a little bit of advanced git functionality just
to give you a flavor of what sorts
of cool things this tool can do. And
then, finally, we have a couple other topics
that are covered in the lecture notes in
more detail. I'll just quickly list them here
so you know what to look for. One
is that there are many graphical clients for
git. We don't personally use them. We like
the git command line tool but some of
them are kind of okay and you might
want to check them out just to see
if you prefer using those. Another thing is
shell integration. So you've noticed that in this
tutorial I've done git status a whole bunch
to see kind of what's going on with
my repository. Well that's kind of annoying to
do and a lot of people have their
shell prompt set up so that just within
this shell prompt itself like on every line
it will show me a very succinct summary
of what's going on with my repository. So
it might show me a summary of what
branch I have currently checked out along with
maybe if I've modified files or untracked files
and so we have a link in the
lecture notes on how to get some nice
shell integration for displaying kind of git related
information in your shell prompt. Similar to that,
you can get integrations with your text editor.
So, example, I use Vim and I have
a plugin for Vim that does all sorts
of interesting git related stuff. One thing I
can do within this plugin is look at
git blame information. So remember we just looked
at this through the command line, instead I
can look at it with this plugin and
it lets me work with it a lot
faster. I can look at git blame, press
enter when hovering over a specific commit, and
it shows me that particular commit in my
text editor. It even hides all the other
files and shows me just the one file
I was looking at which is presumably what
I care about. So we have links to
that in the lecture notes as well. And,
there are a couple other interesting things you
could look at there if you're interested. Finally,
this lecture by itself is probably not enough
to teach you everything you need to know
about git. It's a good start. We think
that the right way of learning git was
to learn about the underlying data model, the
whole objects and references and how git models
history, and then we gave you an introduction
to using the git commands and if you
want to become really proficient at this tool
in the resources section in the lecture notes
for today we have a link to a
book called pro git so this is a
free book it's nicely written, it's pretty short
and I think going through the first couple
chapters of that book should teach you basically
everything you need to know in order to
use git proficiently for real software projects and
for contributing to projects on GitHub and things
like that. And then finally, just like all
the other lectures, we have a number of
exercises you can go to go through if
you want some interesting and challenging problems that
you can figure out how to do.